{{title.zh=}}梆梆两锤下的斑驳陆离
{{intro.zh=}}（艺术团投稿）带着这份自由，把特别的景致化作别有洞天的绮思吧～
{{title.en=}}Diversity as Percussion’s Metaphor
{{intro.en=}}(Art troupe submission) Take that freedom and turn the special sceneries into unique ideas.

{{date=}}2022.21

{{contents.zh=}}
!<note 本文是向清华大学学生艺术团军乐队队刊《军韵》2022 年 12 月总第 58 期的投稿。>

!<h1 掉队的小精灵 #spirits>
两年前，当我在一场排练中一边数着小节、一边神思恍惚地环顾着二队的小伙伴时，一个场景忽然浮现在脑海。
管乐的浑厚音色仿佛轨道上的一辆火车，乐曲的节拍化作蒸汽机与车轮发出的规律声响，伴着列车在夜色中隆隆往前驶去；而周围是一群小精灵，绕着列车飞舞，将它包裹在一片流光里。
这群小精灵自然是打击乐的化身。随着乐队经历的增长，这幅图景也愈发清晰真实起来：即使是大鼓甚至大镲这样爽直的乐器在舞台上也仍然是那些推着音乐前行的小精灵，而不会是其中最充实的那辆蒸汽机车。纵使声部合排时的排练厅再吵闹，也好像只是一个等待着被填上内涵的空壳。
我有幸在许多地方体验过合唱的不同角色；在振动的空气中感受着自己周围的声场、摸索着乐音的共振，如同海洋中被鱼群裹挟着前进的鱼儿，或者随着鸟群一同飞翔的一只小鸟，我想这和管乐合奏应有几分相似。可是作为打击乐演奏员的经历是截然不同的：站在外侧向管乐看去，颇有种“高处不胜寒”的体验，虽有独特的景色，却也被弥漫的不安定感包围；而手中乐器的声音也好像永远漂浮在乐队的四周，每一个恰当或是失误的音符都在音乐中暴露无遗。记得刚入队时就听前辈们说起“打击乐都是 solo”，随后一次次的排练与演出确实也让我切身体会到了每一次站在乐器前这几分难免的忐忑。
打击乐是被边缘化的——一次次提及“练管”时被落下的“练鼓”、“全体……哦不要打击”之后的相视苦笑、对着“男”“女”“打击”化妆间标识的调侃、声部合排时说出“乐队”又沉吟片刻纠正的“管乐”，无一不映射着那些一不留神就掉队的精灵们，不时望着甩下自己飞驰而去的列车无奈一笑，然后努力追赶回到它身边。
有时这份个性也反过来为他人带来困扰。体型笨重的乐器、绘制演出台图时的繁复要求、声部合排时不得不搬离排练厅的乐队伙伴、排练时千疮百孔的声部配置甚至偶尔跌跌撞撞的节奏……一切被大家看在眼里。不止一次地担心，大家心目中的打击乐是什么样子呢？打击声部演奏员们为音乐作出的贡献，是否无愧于大家各自的此般大费周章、是否没有辜负乐器和乐曲的潜力呢？
我不知道。列车之外，放眼望去是茫茫的未知。

!<h1 离群的探险家 #adventurers>
这份迷茫是真切的，但我觉得扮演独具一格的角色不是一件坏事，或者说至少是一件有趣的事。打击乐就这样在乐队的周围延展着自身的多元性——五花八门的乐器、千变万化的声部分配；不被乐器和乐谱定义，甚至成员也不设边界。学长可以“临危受命”放下小号来分担少许打击乐的任务，现代交响打击乐探路人之一的 John Cage 在音乐会中也邀请了自己的雕塑家配偶 Xenia 来参与演奏；而 Sarah Hennies，一位当代作曲家和打击乐手，则在采访中感慨，“即使在舞台上只摇破烂小铃铛，也无可置辩地符合一名打击乐手的角色”。
与此同时，边缘的处境意味着外界审视的部分缺席，这很大程度上也将音乐中丰富可能性的发言权交给了演奏员本身。乐谱上寥寥数个音的理想演绎方式，往往需要结合乐器与乐手的复杂现实来灵活调整。这种限制与引导的缺乏，大概也是不安定感的一大来源。
尽管如此，这份高度的自由仍然是围绕着集中的目的展开的。多元化发展的最终归宿必然是服务于音乐，意在探索音乐中更多样的可能性，挖掘不同乐器甚至普通物件参与音乐表达的潜力。这是一切打击乐的创新与实验所围绕的主题。Henry Cowell 和 John Cage 在1930—40 年代就在节目单上写道，新声音的潜质是西方音乐未来的重要课题，“打击乐就像一个箭头，指向声音的整片未探索领域”；这段孤独的旅途离不开潜心耕耘打下的基础。Cowell 依托于亚洲民俗所创作的《Pulse》《Return》等打击重奏乐曲是早期的重要里程碑，在摆脱限制的乐器编制与节奏模式背后，只有精巧的结构设计与细致的演出表情，才能将这样新奇的听觉体验展现给世界。可以说，面对打击乐，作曲家与演奏员常常都会成为在音乐的边界苦心求索的探险家。
YouTube 音乐人 Adam Neely 在一次与 Philip Ewell 教授的访谈中讨论了当代以欧洲为中心的音乐教育及研究的局限性，指出其话语体系忽略了不同文化对音乐的多角度的理解。在惯常的视野之外存在无数有趣的、激发灵感的可能性，而打击乐及其隐喻的多元性正是一座指引探索的灯塔。
多元性孕育着创造力，边缘性则消除了传统的拘束，二者结合赋予了打击乐特立独行的创新性。不设限的空间，带来的是直面未知的责任，呼唤的则是无拘无束的表面下对感悟与实践的不懈坚持。

!<h1 奔跑的追光者 #pursuers>
学生乐队本身就是对个体十分包容的组织形式，而管乐灵活的声部配置更是为能力各有不同的演奏员创造了充分的空间。面对复杂的乐曲，每位参与者对自身能力及意愿的表达都被各自听见，其中也不时窥得友人们的内心世界。这是一个音乐的复杂性与个体的复杂性都会被看见的地方，也催化着每个人对自身的反省。自己在音乐中是什么样的角色，又希望作出怎样的贡献？又或者，想成为的那件“自己以外的”事物，是什么呢？我想，每个人一定都悄悄有着自己的答案。
我不止一次地看到身边努力追逐自己理想中模样的乐队朋友们。我看到勤勉的前辈奔向自己热爱的专业，走出失败的辛酸飞往更远的国度圆梦；看到同声部的友人全身心投入困难的段落，把情怀藏进充满特殊意义的乐曲；看到伙伴完成管乐声部的练习后又在不一样的乐器中觅得一份愉悦，最终在大赛的舞台上实现自己的打击乐心愿。看着这些，我由衷地感到欣赏与钦佩。
Sarah 提到，舞台是一个象征力量的处境，舞台上的人们可以用自身的存在传达出有力的信息；灯光下的每个人都可以成为一个 icon。每一次走上舞台的机会背后都是日复一日的付出；历经艰辛将这份力量握在手中的自己希望做一名怎样的演出者、向观众和伙伴们传递什么样的话语，又看到了一同登台的朋友们怎样的坚定信念呢？在每一次演出中遇见这些闪闪发光的宝藏，着实是件令人感慨的、无比幸福的事。
边缘与多元是一个流动的概念，每个人都会在某些时候成为独特的、被遗忘的、甚至说不定是古怪的那一部分。乐队共同体的力量足以消释这份未知与迷茫：万千的才能都有独一无二的价值，如果与众不同，那或许正是大放异彩的好机会。身处边界并不是一件容易的事，但是假如可以的话，就带着这份自由，把特别的景致化作别有洞天的绮思吧。
列车与小精灵一定是形影相依的。在舞台上化作同样的音乐，用各自的方式演绎着世间的悲喜酸甜——哪里还有什么分别可言呢？

!<h1 参考资料 #refs>
<lang en Hennies, Sarah 2018, “Queer Percussion.” Queer Trash: the Symposium.>
<lang en Miller, Leta E. 2006, “Henry Cowell and John Cage: Intersections and Influences, 1933–1941.” Journal of the American Musicological Society, 59(1), 47–112.>
<lang en Neely, Adam 2020, “Music Theory and White Supremacy.” YouTube. https://youtu.be/Kr3quGh7pJA>

{{contents.en=}}
!<note This article is a submission to the biannual journal of the wind band of the student art troupe of Tsinghua University; December 2022, No. 58.>
!<note Auto-translated from Chinese by <link https://www.deepl.com/ DeepL>. Inaccuracies may arise.>

!<h1 The Elves Who Fell Behind #spirits>
Two years ago, as I was counting bars in a rehearsal and looking around in a trance at my second unit mates, a scene suddenly came to mind.
The thick tones of the winds sounded like a train on a track, the beat of the piece turning into the regular sound of steam engines and wheels as the train rumbled on through the night, surrounded by a group of sprites that danced around the train, wrapping it in a stream of light.
These pixies are naturally the embodiment of percussion. As the band's experience grows, the picture becomes clearer and more real: even straightforward instruments like the big drums and even the big cymbals remain on stage as the pixies that push the music forward, rather than the steam locomotive that fills it out the most. Even if the rehearsal hall is noisy when the voices are together, it still seems like an empty shell waiting to be filled with substance.
I have had the privilege of experiencing the different roles of the chorus in many places; feeling the sound field around me in the vibrating air, feeling the resonance of the music, like a fish being swept along in a school of fish in the ocean, or a bird flying along with a flock of birds, which I suppose is somewhat similar to a wind ensemble. But the experience of being a percussionist is very different: standing on the outside looking into the winds, you have the experience of being 'up high', surrounded by a unique view but also by a pervasive sense of uncertainty; and the sound of your instrument seems to float around the orchestra forever, with every appropriate or misplaced note exposed in the music. The sound of the instruments in my hands seems to float around the orchestra forever, with every appropriate or errant note exposed in the music. I remember when I first joined the band, I was told by my seniors that "percussion is all about soloing", and the subsequent rehearsals and performances really made me feel the inevitable apprehension I felt every time I stood in front of my instrument.
Percussion is marginalised - "drum practice" and "all of us" are left behind when "wind practice" is mentioned again and again. ...oh don't hit", the bitter smiles after each other, the flirtation with the "male" and "female" "percussion" dressing room signs, the vocal ensemble rehearsals. The flirtation with the 'male' and 'female' dressing room signs, the 'orchestra' and the 'wind' that is said and corrected for a moment when the voices are in unison, all mirror the elves who fall out of line at the drop of a hat, smile helplessly at the train that has left them behind, and then try to catch up to it.
Sometimes this personality is a problem for others. The bulky instruments, the complicated demands of drawing up the stage plan, the band mates who had to move out of the rehearsal hall during vocal rehearsals, the flawed vocal configurations and even the occasional stumbling rhythm during rehearsals ...... were all there for everyone to see. On more than one occasion, the concern was, what did everyone have in mind for percussion? Did the percussionists' contribution to the music live up to the potential of the instrument and the piece by going to such lengths as each of us did?
I don't know. Beyond the train, there is a vast unknown.

!<h1 The Outlier Explorer #adventurers>
The confusion is real, but I don't think playing a unique role is a bad thing, or at least a fun thing to do. Percussion is a band that stretches its diversity around the band - a wide variety of instruments, a wide variety of vocal parts; not defined by instruments or scores, not even boundaries in terms of membership. John Cage, one of the pioneers of modern symphonic percussion, invited his sculptor spouse Xenia to play in the concert, while Sarah Hennies, a contemporary composer and percussionist, lamented in an interview that " Even if one only rings ragged little bells on stage, one is undeniably fit for the role of a percussionist".
At the same time, the marginal position means a partial absence of outside scrutiny, which largely leaves the say on the rich possibilities in the music to the players themselves. The ideal interpretation of a few notes on a score often needs to be flexibly adjusted in relation to the complex reality of the instrument and the musician. This lack of restriction and guidance is probably one of the major sources of unease.
Nonetheless, this high degree of freedom still revolves around the purpose of concentration. The ultimate destination of diversification is inevitably to serve the music, with the intention of exploring more diverse possibilities in music and tapping into the potential of different instruments and even ordinary objects to participate in musical expression. This was the theme around which all innovation and experimentation in percussion revolved; Henry Cowell and John Cage wrote in their programme in the 1930s and 40s that the potential for new sounds was an important subject for the future of Western music, and that 'percussion is like an arrow pointing to the whole unexplored territory of sound'; this lonely Cowell's percussion repertoire, such as Pulse and Return, based on Asian folklore, was an important early milestone, and it was only the subtle structural design and careful expression of the performance behind the unrestricted instrumentation and rhythmic patterns that allowed such a novel listening experience to be presented to the world. It is fair to say that with percussion, composers and performers alike often become painstaking explorers of the boundaries of music.
In an interview with Professor Philip Ewell, YouTube musician Adam Neely discusses the limitations of contemporary Eurocentric music education and research, pointing out that its discourse ignores the multifaceted understanding of music by different cultures. There are countless interesting and inspiring possibilities beyond the usual horizons, and percussion and its metaphorical diversity is a beacon that guides exploration.
The combination of diversity, which breeds creativity, and marginalisation, which removes the constraints of tradition, gives percussion its unique and innovative character. The unrestricted space brings with it the responsibility to face the unknown and calls for a relentless insistence on perception and practice beneath the surface of unrestrictedness.

!<h1 The Light Chasers on the Run #pursuers>
The student band is inherently inclusive of individuals, and the flexible vocal configuration of the wind band creates ample space for players of varying abilities. In the face of the complexity of the music, each participant's expression of his or her own abilities and wishes is heard individually, with occasional glimpses into the inner world of the friends. It is a place where both the complexity of the music and the complexity of the individual are seen, and where each person is catalysed to reflect on himself or herself. What is your role in music, and what do you want to contribute? Or, what is the thing that you want to be "outside of yourself"? I think everyone must have their own quiet answer.
More than once, I have seen band mates around me who are striving to be what they want to be. I have seen hard-working seniors running towards their favourite profession and flying out of the pain of failure to fulfil their dreams in a faraway country; I have seen friends in the same section devote themselves to difficult passages and hide their feelings in music with special meaning; I have seen partners finish their wind section practice and then find joy in a different instrument and finally realise their percussion aspirations on the stage of a competition. Watching this, I felt a genuine appreciation and admiration.
Sarah mentioned that the stage is a symbol of power and that people on stage can use their presence to send a powerful message; everyone under the lights can be an icon; behind every opportunity to go on stage is the day-to-day work; what kind of performer do you want to be, what kind of message do you want to send to the audience and your partners, and what kind of determination do you see in your friends who are on stage together? What kind of message do you want to give to your audience and your partners, and what kind of conviction do you see in your friends who are on stage with you? It's a great blessing to meet these shining treasures in every performance.
Marginalisation and diversity is a fluid concept, and everyone is at some point a unique, forgotten and perhaps even eccentric part. The power of the band community is enough to dispel the unknown and the confusion: all talents have a unique value, and if they are different, then perhaps that is the opportunity to shine. It's not easy to be at the border, but if you can, take that freedom and turn the special sceneries into unique ideas.
The train and the pixie must be inseparable. The same music on the stage, the sorrows and joys of the world in their own way - what's the difference?

!<h1 References #refs>
<lang en Hennies, Sarah 2018, “Queer Percussion.” Queer Trash: the Symposium.>
<lang en Miller, Leta E. 2006, “Henry Cowell and John Cage: Intersections and Influences, 1933–1941.” Journal of the American Musicological Society, 59(1), 47–112.>
<lang en Neely, Adam 2020, “Music Theory and White Supremacy.” YouTube. https://youtu.be/Kr3quGh7pJA>

{{toc=}}true
