{{title.zh=}}自由地成为自己以外的一切
{{intro.zh=}}（艺术团投稿）至少在拿起槌的时候，可以自由地选择不再做自己。
{{title.en=}}Freely, Into Everything Beyond Self
{{intro.en=}}(Art troupe submission) At least with the mallets in hand, I can freely choose not to be myself.

{{date=}}2022.08

{{contents.zh=}}
!<note 本文是向清华大学学生艺术团军乐队队刊《军韵》2022 年 06 月总第 57 期的投稿。>

!<h1 1>
化作春雷，唤醒熬过了风雪严寒的万物，聆听世间的生命吹响喜悦的号角；
乘着季风，被西班牙的热情簇拥，又拂过飘满香气的普罗旺斯庄园；
抱起花束，漫步于巴黎的甜橙温室与咖啡馆，好奇地张望着夜晚的剧场舞台；
系上浴衣，将写下的心愿挂在竹枝，与爱着的人们一同仰望焰火与星空；
好像在这里，可以成为自己以外的一切。

!<h1 2>
从音乐响起的那一刻起，乐队里的人们似乎就不再是“自己”了。
一切带来欢乐与烦恼的“自己的”事物——外貌、嗓音、性别、年龄、学习、工作——都短暂地烟消云散。我失去了自己的名字，逃离原本的皮囊，化作小钟琴、铃鼓、木鱼；或者，成为焰火、冬风、山脉、浪花，成为舞步，成为山歌，成为勇气的号角，成为爱情的心跳，成为世间灿烂而浪漫的一切。
乐器的声音就是我的声音，我的情感便是乐器的情感。我不再是生活中的那个背负着五颜六色标签、维系着千丝万缕联系的人，而是全然与乐器和乐队融合，纯粹地化作音乐的一部分。
当一次合排中因指挥提及的“定音鼓”几个字而猝不及防地从琴背后惊起时，才意识到曾经陪着我走过二队生涯的这件乐器早已给我留下了难以磨灭的印迹；而在未来，更多的乐器也将陪伴我度过一样长的光阴。
会在指挥“木琴下去要练”的评论后，如同被指名道姓般无地自容；会因为不能在喜欢的乐曲中“成为”喜欢的乐器而悄悄难过。
但是至少在拿起槌的时候，可以自由地选择不再做自己。

!<h1 3>
“指挥”一定是个很沉重的词。站上指挥台，就需要尽一切努力去容纳乐队与听众的信任。
指挥在演出时究竟要做什么呢？友人好奇地提起这个问题，我却陷入沉思不知如何回应。也许可以说是用情绪感染乐队，让音乐更富有表现力？
坐在二队沙龙的舞台下、站在一队专场的灯光里，望着学生指挥们在星空般的背景下画出一个个图案，一股莫名的敬畏之情涌上心头。下，左，右，上——我直到观看二队沙龙时才忽然意识到这些图示是如此简单而神圣，如一根魔杖画下的古老深邃的咒符；而指挥如灵媒一般，用从神秘的地方汲取的力量，为乐队与音乐蒙上一层高光。
或许，指挥也不再是自己，而是成为了音乐中灵性与神圣性的化身吧？

!<h1 4>
我可以成为指挥吗？我不知道。我问 31，问 bw，问 X 指，问 q 首席，每个人都期待地说着没问题、加油。
但是我还是不知道，为什么大家对我此般信任。有时候也会怀疑自己这个行走的 INFP 刻板印象是不是真的不太擅长这种事。
会沉浸于音乐忘记挑刺，会慌张地向管乐声部试探“有没有可能再…一点”，会担心地说“累的话也可以不用太努力”，会想在指挥台上挖地洞往里钻，会在辜负期待、浪费大家时间的时候在台上拼命道歉，会在得到 zy、zh、bw、X 导和队外的 wr 同学的安慰和鼓励时任凭泪水流下。
但是当揣摩着游园乐曲的一句句歌词，在乐谱上写下一条条注释，对着镜子掐着一遍遍 46 秒，举着旗杆打下一个个拍点的时候，都在被一些别的什么由内而外地感染着。
即使自己的性格不合适也没关系，因为在乐队前方充满着自己以外的可能性。
下次站在大家面前的时候，一定会是更好的模样。

!<h1 5>
二队的声部合排充满着美好的回忆——是指刚完成沙龙演出的二队，虽然这么说有点怪。
或许是因为熟悉的乐器与合适的难度而更加得心应手，但更多是因为有趣、可爱的人们。这里也仿佛一面镜子，映出音乐在自己心中的模样，映出自己曾经在二队体验过的纯粹的欢乐。
也许合排的时候总像是在和大家一起做些修修补补的枯燥任务，但是当空气与地面的振动传遍整个空间，带动身体与心灵一同共鸣时，才终于在沙龙观众席上为音乐承载着的人性中闪闪发光的美好而震撼与赞叹。看着每一个在台上自由流淌的、从曾经的青涩一路走来的音乐段落，看着《打上花火》重奏近乎完美的演绎与 yd 讲述的背后长长的故事，很难不在流遍全身的酥麻中落泪。
有次排练结束后 sy 感叹说我好喜欢夸人，可是每个人的努力与成果都是那么令人感动呀。
一年半前，在二队首演结束后的深夜收到了 ccy 激动的私戳夸夸；现在终于感同身受了一次，中场时忍不住给大家发消息赞美，结束后又跑上台一个劲地吹捧。没带着花束来听沙龙一定是今年在军乐最大的遗憾了。
或许我也成为了二队的一部分吧？

!<h1 6>
年年岁岁花相似。
同样的乐曲、同样的练习，都已被重复了无数次，在未来也会传到一届又一届的手上，一次又一次地再现。
岁岁年年人不同。
人们来到这里，笑过、哭过，幸福过、烦恼过；然后挥手作别，成为军韵里轻描淡写的几个铅字，把舞台留给未来的最强学员班，将每一年、每一场演出背后藏着的不为人所知的故事封存。
我为身边人的离去感到不舍，因他们会随着我的一部分去往遥不可及的远方；但是我们也将带着各自的一部分，带着共同化作的音乐的一部分，各自奔向更加广阔的未来，去成为理想中的各种形状。
愿管乐之风永远与你们的心灵共振；愿生涯的朋友能望见你们去自由地成为自己，或者自己以外的一切。

{{contents.en=}}
!<note This article is a submission to the biannual journal of the wind band of the student art troupe of Tsinghua University; June 2022, No. 57.>
!<note Auto-translated from Chinese by <link https://www.deepl.com/ DeepL>. Inaccuracies may arise.>

!<h1 1>
To become the thunder of spring, to wake up everything that has survived the cold and wind, to hear the trumpet of joy of the life of the world.
To be surrounded by the warmth of Spain in the monsoon breeze, and to pass through the scented estates of Provence.
To pick up bouquets of flowers and wander through the sweet orange conservatories and cafes of Paris, gazing curiously at the theatre stages of the night.
Tying on a yukata, hanging a written wish on a bamboo branch and gazing up at the fireworks and stars with the people you love.
It seems like a place where you can be everything other than yourself.

!<h1 2>
From the moment the music starts, it seems that the people in the band are no longer 'themselves'.
All the things that brought joy and trouble to the 'self' - appearance, voice, gender, age, studies, work - all disappear for a brief moment. I lose my name and flee my original skin to become a small bell and lyre, a bell and drum, a wooden fish; or, alternatively, a firework, a winter wind, a mountain range, a wave, a dance, a mountain song, a trumpet of courage, a heartbeat of love, everything that is brilliant and romantic in the world.
The sound of the instrument is my voice, my emotions are the emotions of the instrument. I am no longer the person with the colourful labels and inextricable ties in my life, but I am fully integrated with the instruments and the orchestra, purely part of the music.
When I was caught off guard by the conductor's mention of the words "timpani" during a rehearsal, I realised that the instrument that had accompanied me through my career as a second unit had already left an indelible mark on me; and that many more instruments would accompany me for as long in the future.
I will be as embarrassed as if I had been named after the conductor's comment that "the xylophone needs to be practised"; I will be quietly sad that I cannot "be" my favourite instrument in my favourite piece of music.
But at least when you pick up the mallet, you are free to choose not to be yourself anymore.

!<h1 3>
"Conductor" must be a heavy word. When you take the conductor's chair, you have to do everything you can to accommodate the trust of the orchestra and the audience.
What exactly does a conductor do during a performance? A friend raised this question curiously, but I was lost in thought as to how to respond. Perhaps I could say it is to infect the band with emotion and make the music more expressive?
Sitting under the stage in the second band saloon, standing in the lights of the first band, watching the student conductors draw a pattern against the starry backdrop, a feeling of awe came over me. Down, left, right, up - it wasn't until I watched the second team salon that I suddenly realised how simple and sacred these diagrams were, like an ancient and profound spell drawn by a magic wand; and how the conductor, like a psychic, casts a high light on the orchestra and the music with power drawn from a mysterious place.
Perhaps the conductor also ceases to be himself, but becomes the embodiment of the spirituality and sacredness of the music?

!<h1 4>
Can I be a conductor? I don't know. I asked 31, I asked bw, I asked X, I asked Q. Everyone said expectantly that it would be fine, that it would be great.
But I still don't know why everyone trusts me so much. Sometimes I wonder if I'm really not very good at this kind of thing, the walking INFP stereotype.
I get so caught up in the music that I forget to nitpick, I panic and try to find out from the wind section if I can do it... a bit more, I worry and say "you don't have to try too hard if you're tired", I want to dig a hole in the conductor's desk, and I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it when I'm not. They would want to dig a hole in the ground on the conductor's platform, apologise desperately on stage when they had let down expectations and wasted everyone's time, and let tears flow down their faces when they were comforted and encouraged by zy, zh, bw, X and wr from outside the team.
But when I was trying to understand the lyrics of the parade music, writing notes on the score, pinpointing 46 seconds in the mirror, and holding the flagpole to make a beat, I was infected by something else from the inside.
It doesn't matter if your personality doesn't fit, because the front of the band is full of possibilities outside of yourself.
The next time you stand in front of everyone, you'll be a better person.

!<h1 5>
The vocal rehearsal of the second band was full of good memories - the second band that had just finished playing at the salon, although it's a bit strange to say that.
Perhaps it was the familiarity of the instruments and the right level of difficulty that made it more palatable, but more so because of the fun, lovely people. It's also like a mirror of what the music looks like in your own mind, of the pure joy you once experienced in the second unit.
It may always seem like a boring task of tinkering with everyone in the ensemble, but when the vibrations of the air and the ground spread throughout the space, moving the body and mind to resonate together, it was only then that the audience in the salon was finally struck by the shining beauty of the humanity that the music carried. It was hard not to cry at the tingling sensation that ran through my body as I watched each and every musical passage that flowed freely on stage, from my youthful days to the long story behind the near-perfect rendition of "Hit the Fire" and the long story told by YD.
After one of the rehearsals, Sy said that I like to compliment people, but everyone's efforts and achievements are so touching.
A year and a half ago, late at night after the second team's debut, I received an excited private poke from ccy, and now that I finally felt the same way, I couldn't help but send a message of praise to everyone during the interval, and afterwards, I came on stage to brag about it. Not bringing a bouquet to the salon must have been the biggest regret of this year at the band.
Maybe I've become part of the second team?

!<h1 6>
The flowers are similar year after year.
The same pieces, the same exercises, have been repeated countless times and will be passed on to one generation after another to be reproduced again and again in the future.
The people are different from year to year.
People have come here, laughed and cried, been happy and troubled; then waved goodbye, becoming a few lightly written leaden words in the journal, leaving the stage to the best apprentices of the future, sealing the untold stories hidden behind each year and each performance.
I am sad to see the people around me leave, for they will go with a part of me to faraway places; but we will also take a part of each of us, a part of the music we have made together, and run off to a wider future, to become the shapes we want to be.
May the wind of wind music always resonate with your hearts; may friends of your career look to you to be free to become yourselves, or everything beyond yourselves.
